Document Zeebe Cold Backups (#581)
camunda-cloud/camunda-cloud-documentation: docs/self-managed/zeebe-deployment/operations/backups.md

---
id: backups
title: "Backups"
description: "Overview and Guide for taking Zeebe backups"
---

Zeebe fully manages the state of your process instances and does not use an external DBMS, you might want to consider taking backups of Zeebe data.
Zeebe is fault tolerant and replicates state internally.
Backups are only necessary if you want to protect against the loss of entire replica sets or data corruption bugs.

State of other component, such as Operate and Tasklist, is not managed by Zeebe and needs to be backed up separately.

> Taking backups is a manual process that is highly dependent on you infrastructure and deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking backups is a manual process that is highly dependent on your infrastructure and deployment.
```

We do not provide an automated backup mechanism or tool.

## Cold Backups

Cold backups, also called offline backups, require **downtime**.
During the downtime, processes don't make progress and clients can't communicate with Zeebe.
We recommend that you test how your clients behave during the downtime or that you shut down clients as well.

### Shutting down all brokers in you cluster
To take a consistent backup, all brokers must be shut down first.

> As soon as brokers are shutting down, partitions become unhealthy and clients will lose connections to Zeebe or experience full backpressure.

Reviewer: I was thinking whether this also needs some time to flush everything to disk? I.e. the the shutdown has to be completed?

Author: I'll add a sentence to clarify that one should wait for the shutdown to **complete** before taking a snapshot :+1:

To prevent unnecessary failovers during the shutdown process, we recommend to shut down all brokers at the same time instead of a gradual shutdown.

### Creating the backup
:::caution
The `data` folder might contain symbolic and hard links which require special attention.
:::

Each broker has a data folder where all state is persisted.
The location of the data folder is [configured](../configuration/configuration.md) via `zeebe.broker.data.directory`.
To save the the data folder you can either create an archive of the entire folder or take filesystem or volume snapshots.

> Do not merge or otherwise modify data folders. Store the backup such that each data folder is associable to their broker.

Reviewer: The second sentence is hard to read. "Store the backup such that each data folder is associable to their broker." I do not fully get where I should store my backup now. 

I assume that this is the normal location where my application would access it?

Author: Yeah, I agree that's not great writing :D I'll rephrase to make it a bit more clear :+1:

Author: I'll just remove this sentence. What I wanted to say was that no one should start merging all the data folders from the brokers. I think this is clear enough with the example I give below.

Backups are only necessary if you want to protect against the loss of entire replica sets or data corruption bugs.

State of other components, such as Operate and Tasklist, is not managed by Zeebe and needs to be backed up separately.

Taking backups is a manual process that is highly dependent on your infrastructure and deployment.
We do not provide an automated backup mechanism or tool.

## Cold Backups

Cold backups, also called offline backups, require **downtime**.
During the downtime, processes don't make progress and clients can't communicate with Zeebe.
We recommend that you test how your clients behave during the downtime or that you shut down clients as well.

### Shutting down all brokers in the cluster
To take a consistent backup, all brokers must be shut down first.

As soon as brokers are shutting down, partitions become unhealthy and clients will lose connections to Zeebe or experience full backpressure.
To prevent unnecessary failovers during the shutdown process, we recommend to shut down all brokers at the same time instead of a gradual shutdown.

Wait for all brokers to be fully shut down before proceeding to the next step.

### Creating the backup
:::caution

> The `data` folder might contain symbolic and hard links which require special attention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `data` folder contains symbolic and hard links which may require special attention when copying, depending on your environment.
```

:::

Each broker has a data folder where all state is persisted.
The location of the data folder is [configured](../configuration/configuration.md) via `zeebe.broker.data.directory`.

> To save the the data folder you can either create an archive of the entire folder or take filesystem or volume snapshots.

Author: I've added an example `tar` command and linked to the k8s volume snapshot docs.

> Do not merge or otherwise modify data folders.

Author: I've added a sentence that just mentions that merging/modifying might lead to unrestorable backups. I think it's out of scope to explain _why_ that is the case - it should just never be done.

Additionally, you should save the broker configuration to ensure that the replacement cluster can process the backed up data.

Here is how a backup may look like:

```bash
$ tree zeebe-backup-*
zeebe-backup-2021-01-31
├── zeebe-broker-0-config.yml
├── zeebe-broker-0-data.tar.gz
├── zeebe-broker-1-config.yml
├── zeebe-broker-1-data.tar.gz
├── zeebe-broker-2-config.yml
└── zeebe-broker-2-data.tar.gz
```

### Resuming

After taking the backup, brokers can be started again and will automatically resume with processing.

## Restore from backup

### Prepare Replacement cluster

:::caution

> Use the same or the next minor version of Zeebe that you were using when taking the backup.

Reviewer 2: :wrench: I would use more forceful language here, e.g. `Always use the same or the next minor version of Zeebe...Using a different version may result in data corruption or data loss.`

See the [update guide](../../../guides/update-guide/introduction.md) for more details.
:::

> Make sure that your new cluster has at least as many brokers as the backed up cluster.

Reviewer 2: :wrench: That's very much for advanced users :smile: I would stick to a simple, make sure it has the same amount, with the same IDs, etc. Essentially it should have the same topology. Advanced users can always reach out to go beyond that.

---
id: backups
title: "Backups"
description: "A guide to creating and installing Zeebe backups."
---

As Zeebe fully manages the state of your process instances, you should consider taking backups of Zeebe data.

> [//]:# ("...taking backups of Zeebe to prevent data loss?")

Reviewer 2: I agree that backups aren't strictly to protect against data loss/corruption. For example, they can be useful to rollback application level errors (i.e. a "bug" the user's deployed process, but from the Zeebe point of view it's not a bug). We could simply say backups are especially useful, or are crucial, to protect against...etc.

> [//]:# ("...taking backups of Zeebe to prevent data loss?")

Reviewer 3: Okay, how about "As Zeebe fully manages the state of your process instances, consider taking backups of Zeebe data; this is crucial to prevent data loss, roll back application-level errors, and more."

I really just want to stress the importance of the doc/backups to the reader.

Zeebe is fault-tolerant and replicates state internally. Backups are only necessary if you'd like to protect against the loss of entire replica sets or data corruption bugs.

State of other components, such as Operate and Tasklist, is not managed by Zeebe and must be backed up separately.

Taking backups is a manual process that is highly dependent on your infrastructure and deployment. Camunda does not provide an automated backup mechanism or tool. However, we do offer the following guidance to create and execute a successful backup.

## Cold backups

Cold backups, also called offline backups, require **downtime**.

During the downtime, processes don't make progress and clients can't communicate with Zeebe. We recommend testing how your clients behave during the downtime, or shutting down clients.

> [//]:# (Would it be worth adding a quick note on how to test clients/providing a link, and do you shut down clients instead for a particular reason?)

Author: I'll go with "To make sure that the downtime doesn't cause issues for your clients, you should test how your clients behave during the downtime, or shut them down as well."

└── zeebe-broker-2-data.tar.gz
```

### Resuming

After taking the backup, brokers can be started again and will automatically resume with processing.

## Restore from backup

### Prepare replacement cluster

> :::note

Reviewer 3: Great question. I'll follow up with Amara to confirm, but currently we're certain that only the note admonition follows our current color guidelines and standards.

> :::note

Reviewer 3: The nice thing here regardless is we can customize a title for the note, which could read "Caution" or "Danger". For example:

```
:::note Your Title

Some **content** with _markdown_ `syntax`.

:::
```

> :::note

Author: @christinaausley Hey, has there been progress on "I'll follow up with Amara to confirm"? Otherwise I'll merge this with a note and custom title as you suggested.
